Welcome back to the Deep Dive. We have something on the table today that is, well, it's logically
dense, it's technically audacious, and quite literally it's a message from the future.
It is. We're looking at a paper dated February 1st, 2026. The author is writing under the
pseudonym Flixson, and the title is Physics After Spacetime. Physics After Spacetime. I mean,
that title alone feels like a provocation. It feels like someone walking into a room full of
architects and saying, so we're done with buildings now. That's not a bad comparison at all. We all
grow up with this very intuitive, almost unshakable model of reality. You've got a stage, which is
space. You've got a clock ticking on the wall, and that's time. And then you have the actors,
the atoms, planets, stars moving around on that stage. That's the Newtonian view, and I mean,
even largely the Einsteinian view. The stage might curve, it might stretch and warp like a rubber
sheet, but it's still fundamentally a stage. It's a container. Yeah, the box of the universe comes in.
And this paper, Flixson's paper, effectively says, burn the stage. Burn the stage. Yeah. Completely.
It argues that the container isn't real. The core premise here is that space, time, gravity,
gravity, geometry, all the things we think of as the fundamental bedrock of the universe
are actually illusions. Or, to be more precise, they're emergent phenomena. Exactly. Emergent
phenomena. Let's make sure we have that locked down for everyone. That's like how traffic isn't a
physical object you can touch. You can't hold the traffic in your hand. It's just what happens when
you have enough cars interacting in a certain way on a road. That's the perfect analogy. Or how wetness
isn't a property of a single H2O molecule. Wetness emerges when you have billions and billions of them
working together. Right. Flixson is arguing that geometry, the very idea of here versus there,
is like wetness. It's a collective effect, not a fundamental truth of a single particle.
So the mission for this deep dive is, well, it's pretty heavy. We're going to unpack this theory,
which the author calls the Relativistic Scalar Vector Plenum, or RSVP for short.
Which is a surprisingly polite acronym for a theory that completely dismantles our view of the
universe. Right. Please, RSVP to the end of space-time. But the central hook is that the universe isn't a
geometric box. It's a thermodynamic process. This paper suggests that the laws of physics are just
side effects of the flow of entropy. That's the headline. You said it. We are moving from a
universe of places to a universe of processes. The universe isn't a noun. It's a verb.
And our goal today isn't just to look at the destruction of the old model. We really want
to see how this theory attempts to rebuild the world from the ground up. We need to figure out
how Flixion thinks we can throw out the universe's geometry and still explain why apples fall from trees.
And why the sun shines. And why my GPS can get me to the grocery store.
Exactly.
And the really satisfying part of this document, and why I think it's worth our time,
is that it doesn't just tear things down. It's a reconstruction effort. It tries to show how the
physics we know and trust Newton, Einstein, quantum mechanics, actually pop out of this new,
messy, thermodynamic soup as special cases.
So Newton and Einstein aren't wrong. They're just incomplete.
Precisely. They were describing the smoke, while this theory is trying to describe the fire that's
making the smoke.
Okay, let's unpack this. But before we get to the solution, we have to respect the problem.
Why do we even need a new theory? I feel like, you know, physics is doing pretty well. We have
nuclear power. We have smartphones. We can land rovers on Mars. What is so fundamentally broken
that it needs a fix this radical?
That's the right question to ask. And you're right. If you are an engineer building a bridge,
physics is fine. It's more than a fine. It's perfect. But if you are a theoretical physicist
trying to understand the basement level of reality, we are actually in a kind of crisis.
The author calls it the crisis of geometry.
Which sounds very dramatic.
Well, it is a kind of conceptual drama. Modern physics, I mean, almost all of it,
is currently dominated by what we call geometric primitives. Whether it's general relativity with
its turved spacetime, or even string theory with its extra dimensions, you always start with a manifold.
A manifold. That's just the fancy math word for a shape, right? A continuous surface.
Exactly. A continuous, smooth shape. You start with a place, a coordinate system. The problem is,
when you use a place as your foundation, you hit a massive, massive wall when you try to combine
the different successful branches of physics. And this is the famous beef between gravity and
quantum mechanics. Yeah. The big versus the small. That's the big one. It's the multi-trillion
dollar problem in physics. General relativity, Einstein's theory, says the stage is smooth,
continuous, like a trampoline. Quantum mechanics says the actors on that stage are pixelated,
jumpy, probabilistic, and discreet. When you try to combine them mathematically, the geometry just
screams. Screams. It produces nonsense. You get infinities all over the place. You get answers
like one divided by zero. The math just breaks. The singularity is like the center of a black hole.
Exactly. A singularity is basically the mathematical framework of geometry throwing its hands
up and saying, I give up. I don't know what to do here. It's where the very concept of place breaks
down. Okay. So that's the big one. But RSVP points out another tension, one that's maybe even deeper,
and often gets glossed over in pop science. The arrow of time. Ah, thermodynamics. The one law that
actually feels like real life. The law of messy bedrooms and cold coffee.
Right. Think about the fundamental laws we use every day in physics. Newton's laws of motion,
Schrodinger's equation for quantum particles, even Einstein's field equations. They are all time
symmetric. Meaning you can run the movie forwards or backwards and the physics still works.
Exactly. If I show you a video of two billiard balls hitting each other on a frictionless
pool table and then I play that video in reverse, you literally can't tell the difference. The
physics allows for both. It's completely reversible. But if I show you a video of an
egg smashing on the floor and I play that in reverse. You know instantly it's fake. Eggs don't
unsmash. Splinters don't fly back out of the air to reassemble a perfect wooden table. That's the second
law of thermodynamics. Entropy, which is a kind of measure of disorder or useless energy, always
increases in a closed system. Precisely. Now here is the problem that this paper really focuses on.
In our current physics, we treat entropy as something that happens inside the box. We say, okay, we have
this perfect, timeless, geometric box called space-time. And inside that box, things just happen to be
getting messier over time. So the box itself is neutral. It's time agnostic. The box doesn't care.
Space-time has no arrow pointing from past to future. But everything inside it has a very strong,
undeniable arrow. That is a massive conceptual mismatch. We have a universe that supposedly
doesn't care about the direction of time, filled with stuff that cares very, very much about the
direction of time. And that mismatch, that fundamental tension, is what RSVP attacks.
It flips the entire hierarchy on its head. Instead of saying geometry is fundamental and entropy happens
inside it, this paper says entropy is fundamental and geometry is just what happens when the entropy
cools down and stabilizes. That is a wild inversion. It's like saying the road isn't built for the
cars to drive on. The path the cars wear into the grass created the road. That's actually a really
good analogy. But the paper uses one that I think is even more evocative. It really made this whole
concept click for me. They call it the river in the ice. Yes, I loved this section. It's a fantastic
mental model. Let's walk through the river in the ice. Okay. So standard physics views space as a
concrete swimming pool. The water inside might move around. You might make waves. You can splash.
But the pool itself is rigid. It's fixed. It's there before the water and it's there after the
water is drained. That's the geometric view. The pool is the stage, the manifold. RSVP says,
no, the universe isn't a pool. It's a rushing, freezing river. A frozen river. Okay.
Imagine a turbulent flow of water, just pure chaos. That water represents the raw flow of entropy and
energy, the fundamental stuff of the universe. It's chaotic. It's dynamic. It's irreversible.
Now, in certain places, under certain conditions, the flow stabilizes. It becomes laminar. It cools
down and it forms a layer of ice on the surface. And that layer of ice is what we perceive as space
time. Exactly. To us, tiny creatures living on the surface of the ice, the world looks solid. It looks
stable. It's smooth. We can draw lines on it. We can do geometry. We can verify Einstein's equations
by sliding pucks across the ice and measuring how their paths curve. But we are mistaking the ice for
the whole world. We're living on a phase change. We are mistaking a phase state for the fundamental
reality. The ice is just a stabilized regime of the flowing water underneath. It's a temporary pattern.
This immediately explains the singularities, doesn't it? It does. Perfectly. What happens if the water
underneath gets too hot or starts moving too fast and becomes turbulent again? The ice cracks. It
melts. Exactly. If you go to the center of a black hole or you go back to the extreme conditions of the
Big Bang, the energy density is so high that the ice of space time literally cannot exist. It melts back
into the raw fluid plenum. So when our math breaks down into the singularity, it's not because the
universe itself is broken. It's because we are trying to use a map of the ice to navigate the
flowing water. We're trying to walk on water using ice skates. It just doesn't work. The rules change
because the state of the system has changed. The geometry dissolves. That is such a powerful image.
It changes the entire feeling of the universe from a static structure to a living flow.
It makes the universe dynamic at its very core. It's not a place. It's a behavior.
Okay. So let's put on our wetsuits and dive into the water. Yeah. If we're throwing out the manifold
and the metric, the usual rulers and protractors of physics, what are we left with? Section two of the
outline calls this the RSVP substrate. What are the ingredients of this reality soup?
The paper calls for a minimal ontological commitment. Which is just fancy academic speak
for let's assume the absolute bare minimum and see what we can build. Exactly. We don't assume
distance. We don't assume time coordinates. We don't assume light cones or causality. We start with a
blank canvas, a topological 4D manifold, which is basically just a way of saying things can be
near other things. And we populate it with just three interacting fields. The holy trinity of RSVP.
But plenum, as the paper calls it. All right, lay them on me. Field number one. First, we have the
scalar constraint field, which is denoted by the Greek letter phi. A scalar field. So it just has a value
at every point, like temperature. Exactly. But what does it do? It's not a force, not like a push or a pull.
It encodes the topology of constraint. Think of it as the terrain of reality.
The terrain? Imagine a landscape with very steep hills and very deep valors. Or an even better
analogy from the paper is a maze. The scalar constraint field determines what is dynamically
possible. It tells you where the walls are. It carves out the paths of least resistance.
So if I'm in this maze, the scalar field is the walls. It's the structure that prevents me from
just walking through them. It defines the geometry of my possible actions. Perfectly put. It defines
the boundaries of action. It shapes the landscape of possibilities. Okay, so we have the maze.
That's the scalar field. What's field number two? The second is the vector transport field,
denoted by the letter $5. This is the active agent. This is the stuff that's actually moving
through the maze. This is the traffic. The runner in the maze. Yes. It mediates the flow of structure
and influence. It carries information. It carries energy. It's the dynamic element that has to
navigate the constraints that have been set up by the scalar field. It's the water flowing through
the riverbed. Okay, so we have the maze, which is the scalar field, and the runner in the maze,
the vector field. What's the third and final piece? It's the most important one. It's the one
that drives the entire system. It's the engine. Entropy density, denoted by the letter de lalers.
The enforcer. That's a great name for it because that's exactly what it does. The entropy density
field enforces irreversibility. The one and only absolute rule in this theory is that zalers must
grow. Monotonically. It only goes up. It can never go down. And this isn't just a statistical
tendency like it is in standard physics. It's an actual field, like a magnetic field. Yes, and that
is a massive conceptual leap. In standard physics, entropy is an emergent property of large numbers
of particles bumping into each other. Here, it's a fundamental ingredient of the universe itself,
and it means that history cannot be erased. How does that work? How does it prevent history
from being erased? Because every time the vector field moves through the scalar field,
every time the runner takes a step in the maze, it generates a little bit of entropy. It leaves a
mark. It changes the plenum. Oh, like leaving footprints in wet mud that instantly harden into
rock. That's a perfect analogy. And those footprints, those new rock formations, constrain all future paths.
The past effectively builds the maze for the future. You cannot simply reverse the flow and
go back to where you started because the terrain itself has been permanently altered by your passage.
That is a profound difference. Usually we think of the past as something that's gone.
It's just a memory. But here, the past is structural. It's the literal foundation we are standing on right now.
It is. And this all connects to the equations that govern these three fields. They are what's called
nonlinear coupled partial differential equations, or PDEs. And crucially, they are not time symmetric.
They only run one way. So you can't just flip a minus sign and run the simulation backward.
You can't. The universe is fundamentally axiomatically irreversible, which means the reversible laws we see in our
textbooks, like a frictionless pendulum swinging back and forth forever. Those are, in a sense,
lies. Lies. That's a bit harsh. Okay. Okay, let's call them idealizations. They are very useful
idealizations, but they're not the truth. They are special cases where we are essentially ignoring
the entropy field because it's producing such a tiny amount of change in the system that we can't see it
on our human scales. So reality is fundamentally messy and irreversible, but we squint our eyes
just right and pretend it's clean and reversible because it makes the math easier. That's the human
condition in physics right there. We love symmetry, so we invent theories that have it, even if the
universe, at its core, doesn't. Okay, so we have our primordial suit, the splenium. We have constraints,
transport, and entropy all churning together. But I look around the room, and I don't see soup.
I see a coffee cup. I see gravity making that coffee cup stay on the table.
How do we get from this weird thermodynamic fluid to the physics class I took in high school?
That brings us to section three of the paper, deriving Newton. This is the first big test.
Can the theory reproduce reality as we know it? And the key is a concept the paper calls the weak
history limit. Weak history. That sounds like an insult. You have a weak history, pal.
It does, but it just means low memory. Or, more specifically, it describes a situation where
entropy production is so slow and smooth that the dependence on the fine details of past events
is negligible. Ah, so the footprints in the maze are fading really quickly, or there are so few of them
they don't really block the path for the next runner. Exactly. Think of the river again. If the river is
incredibly wide and deep and moving very, very slowly, the surface looks like a sheet of glass.
It looks perfect, static, and reversible. Okay, that makes sense. It's a calm state.
In this quiet regime, the turbulent, messy equations of the RSVP transport settle down.
They simplify mathematically in a very elegant way, and the paper shows that they reduce to
something called the Hamilton-Jacobi equation. Which is something I vaguely remember from a very
difficult class. It's effectively the mathematical backbone of classical mechanics. It's a more
sophisticated way of expressing the same physics. From the Hamilton-Jacobi equation, Newton's laws,
like a phagemae, appear as an effective description of the system's behavior. So Newton wasn't wrong.
He was just describing a very, very calm pool of water. He was describing a system where the entropy
generation was so close to zero that you could ignore it and still get the right answer almost
all of the time. And here's where it gets really interesting, especially regarding the action
principle. The principle of least action. This is the idea that nature is fundamentally lazy, right?
Essentially, yes. We usually teach that a particle, when it travels from point A to point B,
will follow the specific path of least action. Like if you throw a ball, it takes that perfect
parabolic arc because that specific arc minimizes a certain mathematical quantity over the whole
path. Right. And it always feels a little bit teleological. It's like the particle has a goal.
I want to get over there and I've calculated the single most efficient way to do it.
Exactly. It implies the particle somehow knows the future and picks the optimal path ahead of time.
So RSVP completely flips that on its head. It says the action principle isn't a cause of motion
at all. It's a retrospective bookkeeping device. Retrospective. So it's something we calculate
after the fact, looking back. Think of it this way. The particle, the little packet of the transport
field is just crashing through the maze moment by moment. It doesn't know the future. It has no goal.
It's just following the path of least resistance right now, driven by the local entropy gradient.
It's messy. It's stumbling forward, not planning ahead. But in that weak history limit where entropy
production is very low, when you look back at the chaotic stumbling path it actually took and you
average out all the tiny microscopic jitters. Looks like a perfect smooth curve. It looks like an
optimal path. So it's not that the particle chose the most efficient path. It's that the most
efficient path is the only track that's left after you average out all the microscopic chaos of its
actual journey. You've got it. We interpret it as optimizing, but really it was just surviving the
constraint relaxation moment to moment. We're imposing a narrative on it after the fact.
That makes classical mechanics feel almost accidental. Like it's a happy illusion that only appears
when the universe is quiet and cold. It is. It's an approximation that works beautifully because we
are big, slow creatures living in a cold, old, and relatively calm corner of the universe. Okay, so we've
got Newton. But Newton is, with all due respect, the easy part. What about Einstein? We promised physics
after space-time, which means we have to tackle relativity head-on. This is section four, and it's where RSVP
gets really, really bold. Because if you throw out geometry, you have to answer the most fundamental
question of relativity. Why is there a speed limit? The speed of light, $2. In standard physics, that's
just baked into the fabric of the stage. It's a fundamental constant of the geometry of space-time.
You can't go faster than tines for the same reason you can't go north in the North Pole.
The coordinates just don't go there. Right. It's a rule of the map. But in RSVP,
there is no pre-built map. So why shitter dollars? Why is there any maximum speed at all?
And why? The paper explains it through what it calls causal cones, or more accurately,
constraint cones. The speed of light isn't a geometric rule. It is a stability limit of the
transport field itself. A stability limit. Okay, break that down for me.
Let's go back to the river. Water can only transmit a wave so fast. If you throw a rock into a pond,
the ripples move outwards at a very specific speed, which depends on the properties of the
water. Okay, that makes sense. Now imagine you try to push a boat through that water
faster than the speed of those ripples, faster than the water itself can get the message that
the bird is coming. You create a wake, a shockwave. The sound barrier is a good analogy.
Exactly. You get massive resistance. The water piles up in front of the boat because it can't get out
of the way fast enough. RSVP says that something very similar happens with the plenum. If you try
to push the transport field, a particle, a bit of information too fast, you generate an explosive
amount of entropy. The friction with the plenum essentially becomes infinite. The flow itself
destabilizes.
So the speed of light is just the speed at which the ice of space-time melts if you try to go any
faster. You're moving so fast, you're boiling the vacuum in front of you.
That's a fantastic way to put it. Yes, it's the balance point where the system can maintain its
stable geometric structure without dissolving into pure chaotic entropy.
That feels surprisingly intuitive. It's not a magic number. It's a structural failure point of the
universe's fabric.
It is. It's the plenum's equivalent of a sound barrier. And this leads directly to Lorentz
invariance, the famous symmetry of relativity that says the laws of physics look the same for
all observers, no matter how fast they're moving at a constant velocity.
Right. That's the absolute core of Einstein's special relativity.
RSVP says this beautiful symmetry only emerges when the flow of the plenum is steady and laminar,
when the river is calm. If you were in the very early universe just after the Big Bang,
when entropy was fluctuating wildly and the plenum was a turbulent mess...
The ice hasn't formed yet. The river is just a chaotic rapid.
Precisely. Relativity as we know it wouldn't work. There would be no fixed universal speed of light.
The laws of physics would be changing from moment to moment and from place to place.
So Einstein's relativity is just a fair weather theory. It only works when the cosmological
weather is nice and calm.
Fair weather, in cosmological terms, yes. Which, thankfully for us, is most of the universe's
history.
Now, speaking of the cosmos, there is an absolute bombshell in this section about astronomy.
Redshift.
This is the part of the paper that could actually be tested in the near future. And it's the part
that will make a lot of astronomers throw things at their radios, because it challenges everything.
Okay, let's set the stage. Standard view first. We look at distant galaxies. We see that their
light is shifted towards the red end of the spectrum. We say, uh-huh. That's a Doppler effect.
The galaxy is moving away from us, and the space between us and them has expanded, which
has stretched the light wave.
Correct. The expanding universe theory. The classic dots on an inflating balloon analogy.
That's the cornerstone of modern cosmology.
But RSVP comes along and says, not so fast.
RSVP proposes a completely different mechanism, what it calls non-metric redshift. Remember,
in this theory, light isn't traveling through an empty vacuum. It's a wave traveling through
the vector transport field.
The traffic in the maze. The water in the river.
Right. And this field, this plenum, isn't empty. It's buzzing with a baseline level of
entropy. As that light wave travels for billions of light years, it constantly interacts with
the background entropy of the plenum. It experiences a tiny, tiny amount of drag.
Drag. Light has drag.
In this theory, yes. It's not friction in the classical sense, but it loses coherence and
energy to the background chaos over vast distances. It's not being stretched by expanding space.
It's getting tired.
Tired light.
It's actually an old idea. The physicist Fritz Wicke proposed it almost a century ago,
but it was dismissed because there was no good physical mechanism for it.
RSVP provides a rigorous mathematical mechanism based on thermodynamics.
The light arrives redder because it's effectively exhausted from its long journey through the
entropic sea.
And here's the kicker. If this is true, the universe might not be expanding at all.
Or at least not in the simple accelerating way we currently think. The expansion we measure
might be a profound misinterpretation of this entropy drag effect.
This directly addresses the Hubble tension, doesn't it? The biggest crisis in cosmology right now.
It tackles it head on. The Hubble tension, for anyone who doesn't know, is that when we measure
the universe's expansion rate using different methods, looking at the early universe versus
the late universe, we get two different numbers that are statistically impossible to reconcile.
Right. One method gives you a value of around 67, the other gives you about 73.
It's a huge headache for cosmologists.
RSVP suggests the reason they don't match is because we are using the wrong physical model.
We're trying to fit an expanding balloon model to data that is actually showing a combination
of some expansion and this tired light effect in a dynamic river.
If that's true, that rewrites cosmology textbooks from page one. Does that mean there's no dark
energy?
Potentially, yes. Dark energy is essentially just a fudge factor we added to our equations to
explain why the expansion appears to be accelerating. If that apparent acceleration is actually just a
misinterpretation of this entropy drag, then you might not need dark energy at all.
That is the very definition of a paradigm shift.
It is. It would mean that the redshift of distant galaxies is a measure of the entropy content of the
universe between us and them, not just a simple measure of its geometric size.
Okay, my head is spinning a little bit with the implications there, but we have to keep moving.
We've done Newton. We've done light and Einstein. We have to do gravity.
Section 5, gravity is a traffic jam.
This is my favorite analogy in the whole paper because it takes something as grand and mysterious
as gravity and makes it seem almost mundane.
So Einstein's view, mass curves spacetime. You put a bowling ball on a trampoline and it creates a dip.
Right. And smaller marbles roll toward the bowling ball because they are following the curve of the surface.
Gravity is geometry.
RSVP says, no, it's entropy-driven relaxation.
Which sounds like a fancy spa treatment.
It does. Come on in for your weekly entropy-driven relaxation session.
And in a way, it is a spa treatment for the universe's built-up tension.
In RSVP, what we call mass is really just a region where the scalar constraint field, phi, is highly concentrated.
It's a knot in the wood.
An entropy sink.
An entropy sink. A place where entropy can go to die.
Or to grow.
A place where the system can most efficiently release its constraints and allow entropy to grow.
Think of the vector transport field.
The flow as a river that's always trying to find the easiest, fastest way downhill.
It naturally flows toward these sinks to satisfy the fundamental requirement of entropy growth.
It's the path of least resistance.
Okay, give me the traffic analogy. Let's build it up.
Imagine a major city center.
That's your massive object, like the sun.
It's an entropy sink.
There's lots of activity, lots of chaos.
But it's also the destination everyone is trying to get to.
Okay, the city is the sun.
The cars on the surrounding highways are the transport field energy, matter, flowing through the plenum.
Now imagine you are watching all this from a helicopter high above the city.
What do you see?
I see all the cars on all the highways converging on that one central point.
It looks like they're all being pulled in.
Are they being pulled in because the road itself is bent into a giant funnel?
No, the road is flat.
But they converge because they all have the same destination.
They're following the road network that leads to the city.
Exactly.
It looks like a force is pulling them in.
It looks like the geometry is curved.
But really, it's just the collective behavior of individual agents all trying to satisfy a constraint, get to the city.
So gravity is the traffic pattern of the universe, not a bending of the road itself.
Yes.
And the Einstein field equations, those incredibly complex equations that describe the curvature of space-time, are, in this view, just the statistical averages of this cosmic traffic flow.
They are the traffic report for the universe.
Expect heavy delays in tidal forces near the Sagittarius.
A black hole.
Precisely.
And what we perceive as curvature is just the visual manifestation of entropy gradients.
It's a contour map of the universe's desire to relax.
This makes gravity feel so much less magical.
In general relativity, it's this mysterious, almost spooky action of the void itself warping.
Here, it's just flow dynamics.
It unifies it with thermodynamics.
Gravity is just what happens when a complex system tries to maximize its entropy in a constrained environment.
It's not a separate force.
It's part of the engine.
Okay, let's unpack the other side of the coin.
We've handled the big stuff, gravity.
Now we need the small stuff, the really weird stuff.
Section 6, quantum mechanics.
The translucent film.
The source of quantum weirdness.
Why can an electron be in two places at once?
Why is everything governed by probability until you look at it?
The paper argues that all the weirdness of quantum mechanics arises because the fine-grained, irreversible microhistory of the plenum is fundamentally inaccessible to us as observers.
Okay, that's a mouthful.
Fine-grained, irreversible microhistory.
Let's use the analogy from the paper because it's brilliant.
Imagine you are watching a movie being projected onto a screen.
But between you and the screen, someone has hung a sheet of frosted glass.
A translucent film.
Okay, so I can't see the details.
The image is blurry.
Right.
You can see shapes moving.
You can see a blob of light over on the left and then maybe it fades out and a blob appears on the right.
But you cannot see the exact crisp path the actor took to get from one side to the other.
I just see the blur shifting and changing shape.
That blur is the quantum wave function.
It's a probability distribution.
You look at the blurry shape and say, well, the actor is 50% likely to be in this part of the blur and 50% likely to be in that part.
But behind the frosted glass, the actor is somewhere specific, right?
The movie is still playing clearly.
In RSVP's view, yes.
There is a real, definite, irreversible history of the entropy flow happening at the micro level behind the glass.
But because the entropy at that scale is so chaotic and happening so incredibly fast, we can't possibly track it.
The blur isn't magic.
It's a direct result of our inability to read the fine print of reality.
So the famous quantum uncertainty isn't a fundamental property of nature itself.
It's a property of our blindness to nature's true workings.
It's a property of the interface.
We are reading the coarse-grained, averaged-out version of reality.
We're reading the blurry version.
So what is wave function collapse?
That magical moment when we make a measurement and the particle suddenly snaps into one definite position.
In standard quantum mechanics, that's the biggest mystery.
In RSVP, it's reinterpreted as a localized surge in entropy.
A measurement is an interaction.
It's a collision.
It's you poking the system.
That poke generates a sudden, sharp spike of entropy.
That spike is like a jolt of energy that momentarily tears a tiny hole in the frosted glass.
For a split second, the blur is forced to resolve into a single, specific, irreversible constraint.
The measurement creates a piece of definite history.
Exactly.
It anchors the flow.
It turns a maybe into a definite did.
And that process is fundamentally irreversible.
You can't unmeasure something.
Because you can't ungenerate the entropy you created by measuring it.
Bingo.
And this explains why quantum mechanics is all about probabilities.
Probability isn't fundamental.
It's just the bookkeeping tool we have to use for a history that we can't read directly.
It's like weather forecasting.
We use probabilities for rain, not because the rain itself is magical and exists in a superposition
of wet and dry, but because the atmosphere is just too complex to track every single molecule
perfectly.
Exactly.
RSVP says atoms are just incredibly tiny, incredibly fast weather systems.
That is actually very comforting.
It feels like it makes the world make sense again, in a way.
It removes the magic.
It restores a kind of realism, yes.
But it comes at a cost.
The cost is accepting that we are fundamentally disconnected from the deepest, most detailed
layer of reality.
We're just skating on the ice.
Skating on the ice and watching the blurry shapes of the fish swimming below.
Alright, we've covered space, gravity, and the quantum world of atoms.
There is one big elephant left in the room.
The thing that keeps us all up at night.
Time.
Section 7.
The nature of time.
And this is the part of the paper that might give you a mild existential crisis.
Bring it on.
The paper argues that time is not a dimension.
Correct.
It is not T in an equation.
It is not a coordinate you can move back and forth on, not like north or south or up and
down.
Then what is it?
It is an emergent translation.
Emergent translation.
Okay.
I need the analogy for this one.
The paper uses the analogy of a wind-up toy.
Okay.
I have a little tin robot on my desk.
I wind the spring up tightly.
That tightly wound spring represents a state of low entropy.
It's ordered potential energy.
When you let go, what does the spring do?
It unwinds, and the robot starts walking across the desk.
The walking is time.
Time is the physical process of the spring unwinding.
It is the process of change, driven by entropy's inevitable descent from an ordered state to a
disordered one.
So time isn't the hallway the robot walks down.
Time is the walking itself.
Yes.
That is the absolute critical distinction.
Time is the action, not the arena.
And this immediately and intuitively explains why we have the arrow of time, why time only
moves forward.
Right.
You can't wind the spring back up by just walking the robot backward.
The energy has been spent.
The heat from the friction in the gears has dissipated into the room.
You can't unwind the spring without grabbing it and forcing it, which takes a new input of
energy from the outside.
Which just generates more entropy elsewhere in the universe to wind it back up.
The process is always, always irreversible.
So time flow is literal here.
It's the flow of entropy.
Time only exists where there is entropy production, where there is change.
Wait a second.
So if entropy production stops...
Time stops.
If the entire universe reaches maximum entropy, the so-called heat death, nothing changes
anymore, the whole thing is just a uniform, tepid suit.
Then time itself ceases to exist.
There is no dimension of time left over.
The spring is fully unwound.
The toy freezes in place forever.
That is both terrifying and perfectly logical.
It completely resolves the paradox of block time, the idea from relativity that the past, present,
and future all exist simultaneously.
In RSVP, the future does not exist.
The future is just the potential unwound state of the spring.
It hasn't happened yet because the entropy hasn't flabbed there yet.
It puts the go back in physics.
It makes change real again.
It does.
It makes the concept of becoming a real physical process, not just a psychological illusion.
So what does this all mean?
We're coming to the end.
Section 8.
We have this massive, all-encompassing theory.
It connects everything.
But is it just a nice story?
The paper mentions interface theories.
What's that about?
This is the part of me that's a physicist getting really excited.
Fliction suggests that what we currently call modern physics, things like string theory,
quadratic gravity, loop quantum gravity, these are all what the paper calls interface theories.
Meaning what exactly?
Meaning they're all incredibly sophisticated attempts to patch the bugs in the ice theory.
We keep finding cracks in the ice singularities, the cosmological, constant problem, dark energy.
So we invent ever more complex mathematics, what are called higher order corrections, to try and smooth over those cracks.
We're just putting more and more elaborate forms of duct tape on the geometric model.
Exactly.
We add extra dimensions.
We add terms to Einstein's equations that are based on curvature squared.
RSVP says, stop patching the ice.
You need to understand the water underneath.
The cracks aren't bugs.
They're features telling you that your model is wrong.
The paper makes the bold claim that there is no ultraviolet completion of gravity.
Right.
For decades, physicists have been searching for the geometric grail, a theory of quantum gravity, a perfect geometric description that works at the tiniest, highest energy scales.
RSVP says it simply doesn't exist.
You will never find it because the geometry itself dissolves into raw entropy at those scales.
You can't make a map of a single molecule of water using the concepts of a frozen lake.
So the very mission of fundamental physics needs to change.
It needs to shift from finding the fundamental shape of the universe to understanding the fundamental flow.
Geometry is the stage, and the laws of physics are the actors on it.
Two, irreversibility is the engine, and geolatry, gravity, and even time are just the smoke coming out of the exhaust pipe.
That is a killer line. Gravity is the smoke.
It changes the entire game.
It unifies gravity and quantum mechanics not by forcing one to obey the other's rules, but by making them both emergent phenomena from the same underlying thermodynamics.
They are cousins, born from the same parent process, not enemies.
And crucially, it offers testable predictions.
The non-metric redshift or the redshift drift.
But if we build powerful enough telescopes, and we look at the sky, and we can detect the tiring light effect over time, we might just prove Flixxon right.
And if we do, we have to rewrite every single textbook from Newton to Hawking.
Which is the kind of beautiful, productive chaos I live for.
It's the kind of entropy you live for.
Shay.
Okay, we are coming to the end of our deep dive, but before we let you go, I want to leave you with one final provocative thought.
We've been talking about the river and the ice.
We've talked about the maze and the traffic jam.
It's a lot to get your head around.
It is.
But here is the lingering question for me.
If time and space are just stabilized regimes of entropy flow, if our entire reality is just a temporary, fragile patch of ice on a rushing, chaotic river, what happens outside of those regimes?
That's the big, scary question, isn't it?
What is in the water?
What is the universe doing in the places where the ice hasn't formed or where it has already melted?
If you follow the logic of RSVP all the way down the rabbit hole, maybe the universe isn't a place at all.
Maybe it's a calculation, a process of solving a constraint.
A calculation.
We might just be the result of the universe trying to balance its own cosmic checkbook.
We, and the laws we observe, are just the path of least resistance.
We exist because it is the most efficient way for the universe to unwind its initial low entropy spring.
We are just the heat exhaust of a cosmic engine.
In the most beautiful and complex way possible, yes.
Well, on that slightly humbling existential note, I encourage you to look at the world a little differently today.
Don't look at it as a solid, static box.
Look at it as a flowing, dynamic river.
And, you know, watch out for the traffic jams.
Thanks for listening to The Deep Dive.
We'll see you in the future, if the entropy allows it.
Bye.